---
layout: page
title: Engine
nav_order: 3
---
{% picture largethumb IMG_20200327_201050.jpg %}
{: .d-inline-block .float-right .pl-5}

I wanted to update this MGB with a more modern, powerful, reliable
engine, with better brakes and with better suspension. I wasn't too
interested in restoring the car to factory spec.

The obvious choice for an engine swap is the Rover v8. This engine is
tried, trusted, proven and is very much the safe bet. It will fit, and
there's hundreds of examples on the road today to prove that. However,
it's very expensive and time consuming to gather all the right bits,
especially if you want a more modern fuel injected variant. The gearbox
options also mean that you need to replace the diff at even more
expense. It's a relatively common choice for good reason, but I like to
be different so [I considered other options][]

The engine I settled on was an odd choice, one that no-one in the world
had ever done before. I chose the 3.0 [GM 54° V6 X30XE][] from a UK
Vauxhall Omega. It can be found in European Opel/Vauxhall Omega in rear
wheel drive form or in Vectra, Cavalier and Calibra in front wheel drive
form, and in the Saab 9000 as a turbo. It's also available in USA in the
Opel Sintra, Cadillac Catera, CTS, Saturn L-series and Vue. It's a 200hp
narrow angle V6 which suits our narrow engine bay. The engine is taller
than most v6's but the profile of the inlet manifold is perfect for our
bonnet shape. The 5 speed manual gearbox has ratios that are bearable on
a standard MGB 3.9 rear axle although taller final drive is desirable.
The starter motor is in the right place and a rear drop sump is
available (from a front wheel drive variant). The ECU will run the
engine standalone. It's also similar weight to the standard 4 cylinder
but puts out 208bhp. It was cheap and available.

This swap choice was not something I'd initially considered but my
friend had one in his garage and he urged me to take a closer look, and
the more I looked, the more like it seemed the perfect choice! It does
of course have a few challenges but far fewer than any other engine I'd
considered.

I sold the original [engine][] and [gearbox][] to fund the project.

## Specifications


The specifications of the engine is as follows:-

|-------------------|--------------------------------------|
| Capacity          | 2962cc                               |
| Configuration     | 56° V6, 24-valve DOHC                |
| Max. power        | 210PS (155kW) @ 6000rpm              |
| Max. torque       | 270Nm (199.2 lb.ft.) @ 3400rpm       |
| Compression ratio | 10.8:1                               |
| Fuel Injection    | Fully sequential                     |
| Ignition          | Distributorless 3 channel batch fire |
| ECU               | Bosch Motronic                       |


## Sump

The first challenge was the large and bulbous front-drop sump that the
engine came with as standard on the Omega. This, of course, was NOT
going to work in the MGB. It would foul the cross member in every way
possible. A rear-drop sump was required! Luckily the front wheel drive
variants of this engine (Vectra, Cavalier or Calibra) come with a sump
that's rear-drop when installed in a RWD configuration. So the first job
to do on the engine is to remove the Omega sump and oil pickup pipe and
install pickup and sump from a Vauxhall Vectra. When fitting the oil
pickup pipe, make sure to use Loctite on the mounting bolts. You don't
want this thing falling off! Make sure to be very careful about using
the correct torque for the bolts too. When fitting the sump make sure to
use the correct high temperature silicone sealant and a new sump gasket.
Once again be meticulous about correct torque. 

Note, The sump bolts are really not done up very tight at all, so don't overtighten.

{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190302_123315.jpg %}{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190302_123323.jpg %}{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190316_180534.jpg %}
{: .text-center }

## Coil Pack Mounting

The DIS (Distributorless Ignition System aka coil pack) is bolted to the
back of the engine on a metal bracket. You'll need to relocate the DIS
unit because there's just no space for it there but you also need keep
the bracket because it doubles up as a lifting eye. This means you'll
need to use your angle grinder to cut off the shelf that the coil pack
sits on.

{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190330_095906.jpg %}
{: .text-center }

## Rear Water Pipe

This engine takes water from the radiator lower pipe and feeds it into
the back of the engine via a stainless steel pipe. The standard Omega
one is quite bulky and wants to occupy the same space as the steering
cone on a right hand drive car. This pipe is essential for the running
of the engine therefore needs to be re-made in a way that fits the MGB
engine bay. I chose to make mine using very carefully cut and welded
stainless steel tube. It needs to pass underneath the exhaust headers so
can't realistically be made of anything that will burn or melt.

{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190330_095919.jpg %}{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190829_152035.jpg %}{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190628_191217.jpg %}{% picture mediumthumb IMG_20190628_191224.jpg %}
{: .text-center }

## Front Suspension Crossmember

I had initially cut out a relief in the front suspension crossmember to
provide clearance for the engine lower pulley. However, I'm not
convinced this is necessary. I suspect that the engine will fit without
mods (with tight tolerances). I later made good this work and now it
looks like the crossmember was never touched.

IMG\_20190612\_210820.jpg IMG\_20190612\_210838.jpg
IMG\_20190613\_182531.jpg IMG\_20190613\_182542.jpg

i## Engine Mounts

I went through several iterations of engine mount and came to the
conclusion that it's not feasible to keep the standard location for MGB
engine mount. It's occupying space that you need for the exhaust.
Therefore, the mount needs to be slightly further forward.

An engine mount always consists of 3 parts - the engine bracket, the
rubber mount and the chassis bracket. The chassis bracket was moved to
the rear part of the crossmember. There's plenty of room there to make a
\~30 degree platform for the engine mount to bolt on to. The rubber
mount is a generic engine mount that I purchase from [Car Builder
Solutions][]. The engine side was templated in cardboard first and then
cut from 5mm sheet steel, then carefully adjusted and trial-fitted until
it was perfect. Remember to get both sides at exactly the same angle
with engine aligned centrally.

IMG\_20190404\_212015.jpg IMG\_20190404\_212127.jpg
IMG\_20190405\_190903.jpg IMG\_20190405\_190915.jpg
IMG\_20190405\_190947.jpg IMG\_20190405\_190955.jpg
IMG\_20190405\_201014.jpg IMG\_20190407\_154534.jpg
IMG\_20190407\_154543.jpg IMG\_20190407\_154551.jpg
IMG\_20190407\_155319.jpg

## Gearbox Mount

The MGB gearbox mount is, amazingly, in more or less the right place for
the Omega gearbox. The MGB gearbox mount was cut off, some holes drilled
through the bottom and the Omega mount bolted on. I did later make a
small adjustment to provide for a flat mounting surface but the amount
of work here is trivial

IMG\_20190407\_154652.jpg IMG\_20190407\_155706.jpg
IMG\_20190417\_205222.jpg

## Transmission Tunnel

The Omega gearbox is somewhat taller than the standard MGB box. I was
concerned that it wouldn't fit so I performed a similar mod to what
you'd do if you were fitting an LT88 or R380. I'm not 100% convinced
this was necessary. I chose to do the mod slightly differently to how
Rover did theirs. My method was less crude. I effectively reshaped the
horizontal seam where the transmission tunnel meets the bulkhead &
reattached it in exactly the same way but as a curved joint rather than
a straight joint. I gained about 10-15mm of clearance & it still looks
factory.

IMG\_20190311\_203448.jpg IMG\_20190628\_191847.jpg
IMG\_20190630\_200032.jpg

  [Car Builder Solutions]: https://www.carbuilder.com/uk/

## Gearstick Location

The gearstick, more by luck than judgement, is situated at almost
exactly the right location. The gearstick mechanism bolts to the gearbox
by 2 nuts & bolts. If you want it perfect, you need to make a small
adjustment to one of the bolt holes to allow the mechanism to move by
about 5mm to centre the gearstick. You should also completely remove the
external reverse lockout mechanism. This is bulky and gets in the way.
The gearbox has an internal lockout anyway so it's not required. The
horrid gear knob appears to be bonded to the gearstick, so removed the
Omega gearstick and made a new one from various size tubular bar stock.

IMG\_20190508\_142652.jpg IMG\_20190508\_142703.jpg
IMG\_20190510\_181744.jpg IMG\_20190511\_163103.jpg
IMG\_20190916\_190004.jpg IMG\_20190916\_190014.jpg
IMG\_20191020\_201412.jpg IMG\_20191020\_201420.jpg

## Alternator

This by far took me the most time to resolve satisfactorily. The Omega
alternator is mounted on the left hand side of the engine looking at it
from the front (drivers side). It's situated below the drivers side
cylinder head. It wants to be in the same location as the chassis rail
so clearly it has to be relocated. I thought long and hard about where
to put it :-

-   Low and to the side of the engine - absolutely no room.
-   High and to the side of the engine - there isn't really room to put
    it on the drivers side thanks to the brake booster. It could go on
    the passenger side but I couldn't identify any convenient mounting
    points to locate it here.
-   In front of the engine - There's loads of space here.

So, if I had to mount it in front of the engine, how would I mount it &
plan the belt routing? I figured there's no way I could mount it in
front of the engine the correct way around. There's simply nothing to
bolt it to. However, I did find 3 bolt holes behind the cambelt cover
that were used for engine mounts when the car was in front wheel drive
orientation. This gave me the idea that I could create a bracket to
reverse mount the alternator. I went through several bracket shapes &
lots of consideration for belt path so I could get optimal wrap around
all pulleys and still maintain tension. I then went to the breakers yard
and found a small, powerful alternator with the correct bracket position
and the correct pulley. The one I found was off a Ford. I didn't realise
it at the time but it was a "smart" alternator that can vary its output
according to the ECU but without the ECU, it runs as a 1-wire alternator
outputting 90 amps.

IMG\_20190420\_155223.jpg IMG\_20190425\_123945.jpg
IMG\_20190430\_195235.jpg IMG\_20190430\_195245.jpg
IMG\_20190430\_195253.jpg

## Intake

The X30XE as designed for the Omega comes with an inlet plenum with twin
throttle bodies. These are designed to fit onto an apparatus known as a
"[multiram][]". This, in association with the inlet plenum, is part of
the [variable length tuned intake system][] designed to enhance torque
output. It's described in detail in the [Vauxhall College manual][]. The
problem is, the entire Omega Multiram is physically too large to fit and
also is designed to fit a drivers side mounted air filter. I don't have
room for that in the MGB so an alternative inlet is necessary. I
considered omitting the Multiram completely but this didn't necessarily
solve any problems. I still needed to use the Omega rubber elbows that
fitted onto the twin throttle bodies. Quite simply, I couldn't replace
them with rubber tube because they were so close together and I couldn't
locate any suitable tube that would fit. That left me with the situation
that I needed to merge two 60mm pipes together into a single 80mm pipe
so it could enter a common [air flow meter][]. I tried various different
solutions but the one that fitted the best was made from 76mm PVC pipe
and looked conceptually similar to the standard Opel Omega part. It also
allowed me to retain the multiram valve mechanism. To complete the
solution, I mounted an air filter behind the front grill and connected
the two with flexible air ducting.

IMG\_20200123\_191048.jpg IMG\_20200123\_191107.jpg
IMG\_20200123\_191135.jpg IMG\_20200124\_115337.jpg

  [multiram]: http://www.omegaowners.com/forum/index.php?topic=90513.0
  [variable length tuned intake system]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Variable-length_intake_manifold
  [Vauxhall College manual]: http://calibra-classic.org/docs/vaux_v6_engine.pdf
  [air flow meter]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Air_flow_meter

i## EGR Delete

![1024}}][] The engine has an Exhaust Gas Recirculation (EGR) system
which is very clever and misunderstood. In a nutshell, it's allowing
inert gas to dilute your incoming air meaning that you need more
throttle opening to burn the same amount of fuel. This is good because
it's reducing pumping losses in the engine. In normal circumstances, I
suggest you [*don't* remove because it's saving you money][]! However in
my case, I was making new tubular headers and I didn't want to
incorporate the EGR system. Of course, it's not as simple as removing it
because the ECU will helpfully tell you about it in the form of a check
engine light, so we need to fool the ecu into thinking it's still there.
Luckily this ECU is only measuring the return voltages of the EGR valve,
so the answer is to build a circuit onto a piece of strip board that
emulates this. You can use a pcb mount relay rather than an automotive
relay to really reduce the size of the circuit. Once you've built the
circuit, buy a small prototyping box from ebay to house it.

## SAI Delete

Some ECUs use the o2 sensors to sniff the exhaust gases to make sure the
[Secondary Air Injection (SAI)][] pump is running. However, this ECU is
not that clever. This ECU is only measuring return voltage. The pump is
hidden behind an automotive relay so the only thing the ECU can see is
the coil in the relay. You can easily fool the ECU by bridging the SAI
connector with a 100-200 Ohm resistor. It's not too critical what value
you use provided it adds a little resistance.

  [1024}}]: Acdn.z22se.com_userpix_13_EGR_cheater_version_2_1.jpg
    "fig:1024}}"
  [*don't* remove because it's saving you money]: http://www.tuneruniversity.com/blog/2012/05/dont-block-or-remove-the-egr-valve-its-saving-you-money/
  [Secondary Air Injection (SAI)]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Secondary_air_injection

## Fuel Tank Purge Valve

The ECU will occasionally want to trigger a fuel tank purge valve. The
purpose of this is to [vent fuel vapour from the charcoal canister into
the inlet manifold][]. In general, this is a good thing. However my UK
model MGB never came with a charcoal canister. We vent our fuel tank to
the atmosphere. Perhaps at some point, I'll install a complete closed
loop vapour emissions system, but for now, I want to bypass this
function. Once again, the ECU just wants to see some evidence that a
relay has fired, so the same trick will work here as for the SAI. Bridge
the purge valve connector with a 100-200 Ohm resistor.

## Fuel Pump Priming

This ECU is peculiar in that it does not want to turn on the fuel pump
until it see's a crank signal. That means the engine cranks for just a
little longer than I'd like. I'd much prefer the pump to prime the fuel
rail before I crank. The fix is to install a momentary relay to give the
fuel pump power when you turn ignition on. Believe it or not, such a
relay is harder to find than you might think. However, [Car Builder
Solutions sell a 0-60 second timer relay][] which will engage for a
short time when it's given power. This means we can use it to supply
power to the fuel pump for 3-5 seconds when we first turn on the
ignition. The fuel rail will then have fuel pressure so the engine fires
quickly, then the ECU will turn the fuel pump on to maintain pressure.

## OBD Diagnostics

Whilst the Omega does have what appears to be an OBD2 port, the Bosch
Motronic M2.8.1 does not use OBD2 protocol. It uses a previous
generation of protocol that was manufacturer specific. In this case, it
uses KW82 protocol at 9600 baud which was an Opel improvement to
[Bosch's original KW71 protocol][]. I've not been able to find any
specifications on this other than it's a keyword protocol using ISO-9141
electrical interface on pin 7 (K-line) and does not use pin 15 (L-line).
Other ECUs in the car (e.g. immobiliser) are available on other pins.
Anyway, you're going to need a Vauxhall/Opel tool to communicate with
the ECU. The official tools are VERY expensive and out of reach of the
home mechanic, but if you google for OPCOM or VauxCom, you'll find lots
of cheap Chinese knockoff interfaces. The quality of these varies, and
they are all hassle to get working, but once you've got over the
complicated setup, they work quite well.

## See Also

-   [Fuel Tank][]
-   [Propshaft][]
-   [Wiring][]

  [vent fuel vapour from the charcoal canister into the inlet manifold]:
    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Onboard_refueling_vapor_recovery
  [Car Builder Solutions sell a 0-60 second timer relay]: https://www.carbuilder.com/uk/0-to-60-second-time-delay-relay-for-demist
  [Bosch's original KW71 protocol]: http://www.cardiagnostics.be/-now/GT1-MODIC-DIS_bestanden/Prescription%20Protocol%20KW-71.htm
  [Fuel Tank]: Fuel_Tank "wikilink"
  [Propshaft]: Propshaft "wikilink"
  [Wiring]: Wiring "wikilink"
