---
layout: post
title:  "Latest Progress"
---
I've been slowly working through the jobs. The new side chrome strips are installed and it's immediately obvious that I need to tweak the door alignment but that can wait until the summer. The drivers and passenger door mechanisms are installed. I've also installed some [central locking solenoids](/wiring/centrallocking.html) so that both door locks will operate from the alarm keyfob or from the drivers door if opened manually. I did post about this on an MGB forum but it turned into a rather nasty debate on whether you should even lock your MGB so I ended up deleting the thread. Seems they didn't mind me swapping the engine for a v6, changing from rubber to chrome bumpers, but daring to install central locking solenoids is a definite no-no! 

I'm also frustrated by an online seller who's not delivering the carpet that I ordered a month ago. I don't mind being patient but he's giving me almost no comms to let me know what's happening, and the few responses I did get from him were lies ("it's in the post" and "I'll refund you"). It's escalated into a Paypal dispute so hopefully I'll get that refunded soon and ordered from elsewhere. I have, however, rebuilt most of the interior trim panels with new hardboard where necessary and new foam backed vinyl so they're now looking rather nice. Once the carpet is in place, there's only some missing chrome trim before it's ready for 2021 show season (assuming it's not cancelled again this year!)

{% picture blog PXL_20210222_113724480.jpg %}
